# data_modeling_with_postgres
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

## Objective
To create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis

## Dataset

#### 1. Song Dataset:
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

#### 2. Log Dataset:
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator (https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, I've created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table
songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables
users - users in the app
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
songs - songs in music database
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
artists - artists in music database
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## The project repo includes six files:

#### test.ipynb 
displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.

#### create_tables.py 
drops and creates the tables. Run this file to reset the tables before each time you run the ETL scripts.

#### etl.ipynb 
reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into the tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.

#### etl.py 
reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into tables. This will be filled in relation to the work done in the ETL notebook.

#### sql_queries.py 
contains all the sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.

#### README.md 
provides discussion on the project.
